[narrator] Previously on
Star Trek Discovery:
[Burnham] Identify space time location.
[android] You have reached year 3188.
It was not my intention to crash
into your ship. I am sorry.
You ever gonna tell me your name?
My name's Book.
The Federation is gone?
-What happened?
-Collapsed, I guess, after the Burn.
What's the Burn?
[Book] Dilithium.
One day, most of it just went boom.
The thing is you got no authority here.
Whereas the Burn was the best thing
that ever happened to me.
All that matters now is dilithium.
Welcome to Starfleet.
I need to locate
the warp signature of a Starship,
with the identifier NCC-1031.
Something is coming toward us.
Something big.
Enemy vessel right on top of us.
-And we're being hailed.
-[Saru] Open a channel, Mr. Bryce.
[Burnham] Saru!
I landed here a year ago.
I've been waiting for all of you.
All this time.
[Burnham] Personal log,
Commander Michael Burnham.
Stardate 865211.3.
Automatic transmission to USS Discovery.
Wherever or whenever it might be,
I'm sending this message because you need
to know what I've learned here.
I hope that by some miracle,
you'll receive it someday.
Seven hundred years after we left,
dilithium supplies dried up.
The Federation tried
alternative warp drive designs,
but none proved reliable.
Then came the Burn.
No one knows how or why it happened,
but in an instant,
all dilithium went inert.
Any ship with an active
warp core detonated.
The Federation as we know it
disappeared overnight.
It's now just a shadow of its former self.
We didn't give everything
for this version of the future,
and I'll be damned if I let it stand.
I've become a courier.
I transport goods
in exchange for dilithium
to keep exploring sector by sector,
searching for clues
as to what caused the Burn.
Answers that might help
bring the Federation together again.
Wherever I go, I look for you, my friends.
I listen for any sign of your arrival,
but communication remains
severely limited.
Even if I did find you,
I know it would be different,
because I am different.
But I will always love you,
I've had to accept
I may never see you again.
You can love someone
and still let them go.
[engine whirring]
It feels like a dream, this world.
A strange, terrible, beautiful dream.
[computer] Combat simulation, complete.
[Burnham] Luckily, I'm not alone
on this journey.
I found a friend
in the truest sense of the word.
This is my life now, and I...
[beeping]
Hi.
I cannot imagine
what this year has been for you.
I couldn't have imagined it either.
How is everyone?
Grateful for each other.
They are finding ways to grasp
the enormity of what we have done.
Some more successful than others.
And you?
How are you?
Kelpiens have always
had a deep understanding of fear and loss.
Perhaps that prepared me for this.
I do not like to think
that you were alone all this time.
Oh, the ship that pulled you out
of the ice belongs to a friend.
He's a courier...
and we work together sometimes.
You have been a courier?
It was the only way
to scrounge up any information.
I sent a transmission to Terralysium.
Took months to get a response.
And they had never heard of my mom.
I promised Book some dilithium
for getting me here.
Book?
Oh, Cleveland Booker. My friend.
Is he from Earth?
No, but it's the name, right?
There has to be a story there.
I haven't gotten it out of him yet.
We will honor your arrangement, of course,
and I will offer Mr. Booker
my sincerest appreciation.
Welcome back, commander.
Nobody knows... if the Burn
was an accident
or a natural disaster,
but it appears that devastation flashed
in an instant across all known space.
That's impossible.
Nothing could affect
all dilithium all at once.
Says a man who jumps a starship
through mushroom-space.
How many?
How many died?
Millions.
I wish I could tell you
how much of the Federation remains.
But I did find part of a transmission
from an obsolete Starfleet channel. Bryce.
[Tal on recording]
This is Admiral Senna Tal.
I will wait for any
who would join us on Earth,
anyone who still believes in us.
The Federation lives on,
but we need your--
-Is he at Starfleet Headquarters?
-[Burnham] Not sure.
That message was 12 years ago.
And Earth was always
too far away for me to reach.
But now with the spore drive,
we can get there.
We will find Admiral Tal,
and help him begin the process.
We should jump to outside
of Earth's scanning range,
pose as a starship
that was stranded by the Burn,
trying to head home at sub-light speed.
I see your little walkabout
has taught you a thing or two.
I like that.
It is a wise strategy.
So, um...
shall I go?
Commander Burnham, I believe we are due
for a conversation. Perhaps--
Oh, no, no, no. There's no need.
But we agreed to discuss--
No, it's-- It's--
It's you, Saru.
Uh...
[Burnham] And chain of command
dictates it.
I don't know if it's ever been me.
You brought this ship through time.
You carried this crew on your shoulders.
You are a captain
in the truest sense of the word.
It would be my honor.
This ship... bears the name Discovery.
Never has that been more fitting
or more prescient.
She has carried us into the future,
and it will be our privilege
to make that future... bright.
Let us begin.
Together.
Aye, captain!
[woman over PA] Attention, all personnel.
Lockdown drills for Deck 7
have been canceled until further notice.
Hey.
[Burnham] You okay?
We haven't even had a chance
to say goodbye to the friends we lost.
Not to mention...
my mom...
my cousins, my--
Everybody back home.
I mean, what they-- Got breakfast, they...
were late for work, they had kids.
I mean, they had whole lives...
and they're gone.
Now they've been gone for centuries.
I keep thinking there has got
to be something on Earth
that we'll recognize right?
I don't know, the Gateway Arch, maybe?
The Giza Pyramids?
Homemade hummingbird cake?
Cake is eternal.
[laughs]
I always knew that I would see you again.
Yeah, I keep having this, like,
image of you.
You're, like, holding a dandelion...
and you blow on it...
and the seeds they... go.
You let us go.
Didn't you?
It's okay.
Time travel, man.
Oh.
Look, I may not know you,
but like I know you.
Okay? So, whatever, I love your hair.
[laughs]
-Thank you.
-[laughs]
You do seem, like, lighter...
somehow.
Hmm.
[Stamets over comm] Tilly, I'm still
waiting for that recalibration kit.
-Well, some things never change.
-Yeah.
Go, I have to meet someone anyways.
Okay.
[Georgiou] Welcome aboard.
You're not Detmer...
or Tilly.
I'd rather kill myself.
You're Philippa Georgiou.
Michael warned me about you.
Did you listen?
Apparently not enough. Is there a reason
we're having this conversation?
I like to see who's come aboard my ship
after gallivanting
through space with Michael.
Gallivanting.
If only I'd known. Where is she?
Your girlfriend?
She's not my girlfriend.
No, really.
She's not. We didn't have-- Nope, nope.
We're not talking about this.
Answer my question.
In another world,
I might have said Michael
is somewhere being earnest
and doing the right thing.
In this one...
I'm not so sure.
[Book] My oh my, oh my, oh my.
If they could see what I'm seeing.
Who?
Any of them.
Come on. You could run a sector,
two sectors, a dozen even.
You brought me back.
Is it weird to say I knew you would?
No... because you'd have done
the same thing.
Does it feel like home?
It's familiar...
but...
far away.
Do you feel like
you owe these folks something?
Because, if you do, you know, that's fine.
But remember,
you already jumped through a wormhole.
Someone's eventually gonna find out
about this stash you have.
Yeah. Discovery will be a target.
You, too.
You pissed off some scary people.
You helped.
Thank you.
Is there anyone here we could piss off?
[Burnham] You could come with us to Earth.
-So, we can piss off an entire planet?
-Just the opposite, you'd be safe.
No one can find you out that far.
I believe in what I do, Michael.
I can't just give it up.
[Burnham] There can be more transforms
out there in need of your help.
Bollocks.
I mean, yeah, there might be, but...
Clean slate.
Ah. And what do you get out of the deal?
We could use your help
masking all the dilithium.
We, as in Discovery?
What "we" are you really talking about?
Shush.
I've learned by now
it's a lost cause trying to say no to you.
I've never been to Earth.
I've never been to this one.
[Burnham] Book's ship
can cloak our dilithium.
It's the safest choice.
[Saru] I cannot place our entire dilithium
supply into the hands of a stranger.
[Burnham] We don't have
another option, captain.
I must admit, commander, I am having
some difficulty trusting your judgment.
I am grateful
for your support of my captaincy,
but your refusal
to even consider the possibility...
surprised me.
This past year
has altered your perspective.
I'm the same person, Saru.
And I'm not.
As I am now responsible
for every life on this ship,
and as I had intended to offer you
the position as my Number One...
I must insist you explain.
[sighs]
Everything that we dedicated our lives to
disappeared into madness.
We thought we could imagine a future
and it turns out we were wrong.
I adapted.
And I did what I had to,
to learn as much as I could
about what happened and why.
I just need some time.
Book's ship can stay in the shuttle bay
as long as it has our dilithium.
It will remain under guard...
and he will not be permitted to board it
until we reach Earth
and the dilithium has been safely removed.
[Saru over PA] Prepare to jump to Earth.
Auxiliary power system
and primary computer systems are online.
Impulse engines online.
-Weapons systems fully operational.
-Communications online.
Warp core stable and functional,
but powered down.
[door opens]
Welcome to the bridge, Mr. Booker.
And thank you for bringing
Commander Burnham home to us.
Commander Stamets, status report?
[Stamets over PA] Spore drive is
online and ready to go, captain.
Black alert, please.
Oh, shit!
Hey, you didn't tell me
about the spinning part, huh?
Coordinates relative
to galactic core confirmed.
Initiating multi-phasic scans
and updating astrometric data.
Approaching visual range, sir.
There she is.
[Saru] Increase magnification, please.
Mr. Rhys, what are those arrays?
They seem to be some form
of advanced force field generators.
Sir, two vessels approaching
from Earth's orbit.
They do not bear Starfleet registries.
Shields up. Red alert.
[alarm wailing]
Sir, we're being hailed.
Put them through.
A view screen, how quaint.
I am Captain Ndoye
of the United Earth Defense Force.
Your vessel has violated
regulations C-1922 and F-031
of the UE charter
by reaching earth's perimeter.
Leave immediately.
You are not welcome here.
I am Captain Saru of the USS Discovery.
We are a Starfleet vessel and unfamiliar
with the United Earth Defense Force.
Are you a branch of the Federation?
Your ship is not in our records.
Discovery was on a long-term
classified scientific expedition.
We are the descendants
of its original crew.
And you've continued to function
as a Starfleet vessel?
We have.
We wish to contact a Starfleet officer
whose message we received.
Earth was its point of origin.
Your vessel's configuration and metallurgy
suggest 23rd to 25th century construction.
I find it quite odd
that it remains in service.
There is no need to replace
that which is not broken.
How did your ship survive the Burn?
It was not at warp at the time.
For us to consider your request,
your ship and crew
will undergo a mandatory inspection.
Any evidence of piracy
will be dealt with severely.
[Saru] Piracy?
Very well, Captain Ndoye.
We will prepare for your arrival.
We are beaming aboard now.
Don't move.
Hey! What the hell is this?
Don't touch that. Excuse me. Hey!
Who are you?
Put these on.
-Why?
-They're searching the ship.
If anyone is not in full uniform,
they'll be suspect.
They could be arrested.
I see Earth's about as tolerant
as any place else.
What is this? Whatever.
-You're Lieutenant Booker now.
-Aye, aye, commander.
One "aye." We're not pirates.
Remember that time when I had
to wade through that bog on Ikasu
to pull those leeches off you?
Yes, when we saved each other.
Nope, I saved you.
And this is worse than the bog.
Ugh.
[Saru over PA] Attention,
all Discovery crew members.
We are undergoing inspection.
Your cooperation is expected. Thank you.
Okay. Go on.
Mm-hm.
Just a uniform.
No, it isn't.
[chuckles] You've been playing
the long game.
-To get you to join Starfleet?
-To see me in this outfit.
Look, you will be in your own clothes
and on your own ship
and petting your fat cat in no time.
How many times have I told you?
-She's a queen.
-Oh, you're funny. Yeah.
-I am.
After you, Lieutenant Booker.
Aye, Commander Burnham.
I'll go blend in.
[Burnham] Seriously? Admiral?
I had to make it believable.
You don't look so thrilled
to be back in uniform yourself.
I just forgot what it felt like.
Once you've grown
used to living by your own rules,
not so easy
to follow other people's, is it?
Why are you still on Discovery, Philippa?
Why are you?
I see it in your eyes, Michael.
You've tasted freedom
that you never even thought was possible.
Freedom from the obligations
of what others needed you to be.
I'm not sure you ever knew
who you really were
without someone else to tell you,
but you're starting to.
And this place
no longer feels like your place.
Am I getting warm?
[woman over PA]
Commander Burnham to the ready room.
We believed Earth would be a safe harbor,
a place where we would feel welcome.
But we arrived to find you suspicious
of a starship that hails
from your own planet.
May I ask what you were
defending yourselves from?
Everyone lost someone to the Burn.
We had to focus
on what we still had, our planet.
We rebuilt Earth to be self-sustainable,
all while being under near constant siege
by dilithium raiders.
The most recent wave is led by
a tenacious individual named Wen.
He is relentless, targeting our ships.
He would take our dilithium at any cost.
I assure you, we have no ties
with this Wen or any other raiders.
Many of our crew consider Earth
their ancestral home.
Yes, captain, all we want is
to check in with Starfleet Command.
You have been away a long time.
I'm afraid you won't find
what you're looking for here.
The Federation and Starfleet
haven't been on Earth for a hundred years.
Where have they gone?
No one knows.
Most of the ships destroyed in the Burn
were Federation.
No one knew if it was an attack and if so,
whether it would happen again.
Having Federation Headquarters on Earth
made it a potential target.
I do not understand.
Earth is no longer part of the Federation?
Why should we be?
We can take care of ourselves.
What about the Starfleet officer
who sent the transmission I received?
That was just 12 years ago.
What was the name?
Admiral Senna Tal.
Admiral Tal was on Earth,
but he died on an outbound ship
two years ago.
Its destination isn't listed.
I'm sorry.
[Tilly] Ah!
-Hey, that's highly sensitive.
-Stand back.
Is this how it's gonna be?
I thought Earth would feel like home.
-You're not listening to me.
-What are you doing? Don't touch that.
Why is that cube connected
to your bridge controls?
This is a science research vessel.
I'm an astromycologist.
I use the cube
for controlled spore reactions,
which requires
coordination with the bridge.
This science vessel's
practically a museum.
Okay, well, museums are cool, so...
That's what someone
who lives in a museum would say.
-I don't live in a museum.
-How old are you, 17?
Sixteen.
Would you please remove your
16-year-old fingers from my life's work?
What did I say?
This is an interface.
Okay, we get it, you're smart.
Everybody here is smart!
Adira, our job is to inspect, not engage.
We're done here.
[alarm wailing]
-[Saru] Report.
-Five unidentified vessels incoming.
They're powering up advanced phasers.
Those are Wen's ships.
His raiders are always scanning
for targets.
-They are hailing us, sir.
-Do not respond.
Dialogue is an effective strategy.
-We know our enemy. Do not respond.
-You have no jurisdiction on my bridge.
Put them through, Mr. Bryce.
Federation vessel,
surrender your dilithium immediately.
Scan us, we have no dilithium on board.
The speed with which you appear
in sensor range tells me something else.
Surrender or we will take
what we need by force.
Your request to visit Earth is denied.
Leave orbit immediately.
We'll deal with Wen ourselves.
Inspectors, this is Captain Ndoye.
Cease all activities and return.
[man over comm] Sir, we can't.
Something is interfering
with our transport.
What?
This is sabotage.
We are a Starfleet vessel
and would never utilize sabotage
against the Federation's home planet.
We will find the cause of the transporter
interference and handle Wen.
His fight is with us, not you.
Then take that fight away from our orbit
or we'll shoot them out of the sky
and you will have started a war
in the name of Starfleet.
[door opens]
Tell me you saved the day.
I have a plan.
-Yes.
-Remember Donatu Seven?
-No.
-You do so.
Yes, okay.
But I'm trying to forget.
We need to get to your ship.
Unless you wanna keep brooding
into your synthehol.
Synthehol?
Mm.
Damn.
And here I am trying to get a buzz on
and reach a place of existential despair.
-You coming?
-Yes.
I'm worried about my cat.
Don't you have to ask for permission?
I'll apologize after.
Okay, Donatu Seven.
I'm sober, maybe it'll work this time.
[Tilly] You're right. That's not our tech.
Okay.
It's accessing
our deflector shield systems.
Which is allowing it
to block the beaming frequencies
of the inspector's personal transporters.
And there's a fail-safe,
so, if we had to try to disable it,
our shield systems will shut down, too.
It's gonna take hours
to find a workaround.
I knew that tween menace
was up to something.
-She did this while we were yelling.
-She's not even a tween menace.
She's a frigging teen genius.
I mean, I was an engineering whiz
when I was her age, trust me,
but this would require knowledge
of the inner workings
of a 900-year-old Starship.
And she identified
that our bridge controls
are connected to the spore cube
with barely a glance.
She was watching the others to make sure
that they weren't watching her.
She must have been working alone.
What's the point in sabotaging our ship?
She's just trapping
her own people on board.
Maybe she was buying herself some time?
How do you get a teen genius to fess up?
Give her some of your weird mushrooms.
Who are you?
[Bryce] I'm sorry, sir. The raider vessels
aren't responding to our hails.
I'm detecting an unauthorized departure
from the shuttle bay.
It's Booker's ship.
It's no longer cloaked.
There are two humanoid life signs
on board and...
Go ahead, lieutenant.
They have our dilithium.
[Ndoye] Dilithium?
The future looks darker
and darker for you.
Captain Ndoye, I said I would handle
Wen and I intend to do so.
Burnham is on that ship, with Booker.
Lieutenant Detmer.
Where are they headed?
-Straight towards the raiders, sir.
-Hail Commander Burnham.
No, if she responds to your hails,
the raiders will think
that she's working for you,
and that would ruin her advantage.
Advantage for what exactly?
My guess is she's thinking
like one of them,
taking what she needs
and doing what's necessary.
She did not consult me.
Have you heard the one about
the unstoppable force
that met an immovable object?
You are the object.
This is Ndoye, target the vessel
approaching the raider ships.
I will not permit that.
Under no circumstances
can Wen obtain your dilithium.
[Book] Okay, these ships
have seen better days.
Not the raiders we're used to.
[Burnham] Yeah.
Hey.
Let's try Orion Tango.
Yeah, come on, Orion Tango's fun.
-Remember that time with the--
-Feathers.
I thought it was scales.
Whatever they were,
I was digging them out of my hair.
-[laughs]
-We could do Radok Sien.
Absolutely not. How many times
do you want me to get my nose broken?
My whole face swelled up
and Grudge wouldn't look at me for days.
I was crushed.
He's hailing us.
Talk fast.
We have what you need.
We want to make a deal. Scan our ship.
That was entirely monosyllabic.
-I love it when you do that.
-You're weird.
You did it again.
Dilithium? You stole it from Discovery.
What do you care? We have a lot of it.
We'll beam it over,
but you have to leave Earth's orbit now.
What's in this for you?
-We're peace-loving individuals.
-No one simply gives away dilithium.
Earth's got quantum torpedoes
aimed right at us.
Earth hangs everyone out to dry.
I need to find out what they're doing.
I'm getting us out of the range.
-Oh, not yet, Discovery will come through.
-Saru doesn't even know what we're up to.
-He'll figure it out.
-Yeah, why is he gonna come and rescue us?
Because he's Starfleet.
[Ndoye] Fire torpedoes in 30 seconds.
This is your last chance, captain.
My people are on that ship!
Your people who disobeyed a direct order.
They stand down or they die.
My duty is to United Earth.
She's left you only way
to protect Michael and the dilithium.
We will not attack Earth.
-Starfleet does not fire first.
-Fifteen seconds, captain.
-You are a slow learner, Saru.
-And you are far too fast on the trigger.
Lieutenant Detmer, when Earth opens fire,
we will take the hit.
-Sir?
-Move us into position, lieutenant.
Wait, we just recovered.
We don't know what their torpedoes can do.
Shields are at full capacity.
Commander Burnham has never let us
down before, she will not do so this time.
-Five seconds. Four, three...
-Lieutenant Detmer, now!
Sir, we've lost shields.
Divert all non-essential power,
get them restored as quickly as possible.
Raiders are charging their phasers
and getting ready to fire back.
United Earth has a standing order
to take them down.
If they have to go through you
to stop Wen, they will.
Time to fight or die, captain.
[Burnham] Discovery
can't take another hit.
That means the next shot from Earth
will end you.
Lower your shields and let us beam
the dilithium over and stay alive.
Or fire back. Hope for the best.
Either way, I'll sleep just fine.
Prepare to transport the dilithium.
[Burnham] When he lowers his shields,
we're gonna have to move fast.
-Earth is preparing to fire again.
-[Saru] Come around again, lieutenant.
Captain, we have no shields to defend.
I have given my order.
Booker's ship just cloaked itself.
Captain, raiders
are powering down weapons.
Wen has never backed away before.
Perhaps they met an unstoppable force.
-Tell your people to stand down.
-Not until I'm certain that--
[Burnham] Special delivery.
The dilithium is safe.
His people won't fire on us
as long as we have their captain.
It's time for you two to talk.
[Ndoye] There is no talking past the
damage he and his like have done.
Damage we've done?
Do you have any idea how much we've lost?
When was the last time
your two peoples talked with one another?
-They have no respect.
-They have never listened!
Try.
United Earth
doesn't even utilize their dilithium.
They just hoard it,
while the rest of us suffer.
You bring your suffering on yourselves.
Maybe you should talk to one another,
face-to-face.
If you don't surrender your dilithium,
my people can still take it by force.
My life is not that important.
[grunts]
[breathing heavily]
Diplomacy is so slow.
[Ndoye] You're human?
Perhaps it is time
to stop making assumptions...
and start listening.
[Stamets] I know what you did.
What were you doing?
The technology on this ship,
your glass cube,
these spore canisters,
there's more to it than you're letting on.
So, explain it to me or I'll report you.
If you were going to report us,
you'd have done it a long time ago.
Besides, I don't think
you want everyone knowing
you're the one responsible
for the sabotage.
Am I wrong?
Now, you wanna show me
what you're working on?
These spores are from a fungal species
called Prototaxites stellaviatori.
They power an alternate form
of faster than light travel
called the Displacement Activated
Spore Hub Drive.
Though, no one actually calls it that.
And, uh, that interface you saw?
[zipper unzips]
It connects to me.
I'm its human navigator.
[zipper zips]
Are there others like you?
There's no one like me.
Well, I know how that feels.
Um, so, your ship
wasn't stranded after the Burn.
-Are you even a part of Starfleet?
-Yes.
But, um... from the year 2258.
That explains a lot.
I mean, all the old technology
that still looks brand new, but...
How?
If you want any more details
then I need to know who I'm talking to,
because there's also more
to you than you're letting on.
I became an inspector hoping
I'd come across a Federation Starship.
The sabotage was just
so I could have more time here.
I just needed to make sure
I could trust you,
because I want to come with you.
Come with us? Why?
Senna Tal, the Starfleet officer
you've been looking for?
I know him.
When we first scanned your ship,
it was overcrowded.
Strained beyond its means.
Not a typical raider ship.
Our habitats on Titan are...
barely livable.
Titan?
That was once a research colony.
You split off from Earth a century ago.
You're fully self-sufficient.
We were.
An accident at our liquid hydrocarbon
research base
destroyed a third of our habitats.
Wiped out our tillable soil.
We've no long-range communications,
no way to ask for help.
And we have lost...
just too many to count.
The first ship we sent for help
to our home planet...
was fired upon and destroyed.
Well, then we knew we were on our own.
Earth has had to have
strong defense protocols
in the name of self-preservation.
We didn't know.
Now you do.
Captain Ndoye, can Earth provide engineers
and equipment to Titan?
So an accident like that
doesn't happen again.
And assuming
Titan's research was not lost,
perhaps it could be shared
with Earth in return.
I'm willing to discuss terms.
As am I.
The way you handled Wen was admirable.
An exception can be made
for your crew to visit Earth's surface,
should they wish to do so.
We would appreciate that immensely.
It has been a long journey.
-You spoke with Adira?
-She told me she can help you.
She has my permission
to remain on board your ship.
[Saru] Thank you, Captain Ndoye.
I would like to believe
we will return some day.
We hope to offer you a warmer welcome
when you do.
May your search be fruitful, Captain Saru.
Commander Stamets said
you know where to find Admiral Tal.
Does this mean he is alive after all?
Um, sort of.
I am Admiral Tal.
Although human, it appears young Adira
has been joined with a Trill symbiont.
[Burnham] Trill?
I've seen Trills at the Exchanges.
I didn't know they carried symbionts.
Mm.
According to the sphere data...
the symbionts are a sentient life form,
benevolent, and extremely long-lived.
Once they've joined with a host,
that host has the ability to access
the memories of all former hosts.
Including Admiral Tal's.
Yes.
But... it seems Adira
has difficulty accessing those memories.
Perhaps because she is human
and not Trill.
Now, regardless...
she may carry knowledge
of what remains of Starfleet.
I hope so.
I should have told you about my plan.
Yes, you should have.
Trust must remain an assumption
between us.
We have work to do...
and I would be proud to do it
by your side.
But there are things, in my year here...
that I let go of.
And I need time...
to find my way back to them.
If I can.
I will trust you to grow through change...
as you have trusted me.
Then it would be my privilege
to be your Number One.
If things were easy.
-It wouldn't be worth it. Hmm?
-[chuckles]
Are you sure you won't miss the uniform?
I have a rash
from that damn uniform, okay?
You owe me.
You get a fresh start in a new quadrant.
By my count, we're even.
I'm glad you have a family here, Michael.
Till next time.
-[Burnham] That's Starfleet Academy.
-Indeed, or, at least, it was.
Where is everyone?
I gave them leave to pay a visit.
You're welcome to join them.
No.
I think I'll admire the view from here...
with you.
Some places can survive anything.
After all this time.
Oh, my gosh, here it is.
-I used to study under this tree.
-So did I.
[Rhys] Me, too.
It's so... big now!
It's so weird, it's like,
all these things are gone,
but here it is,
it's exactly where it's supposed to be.
We all stood in the same spot,
930 years apart.
Who else can say that?
[comm beeps]
[Saru over radio] This is Captain Saru.
Oh, please, captain,
can we just have five more minutes?
We have much work to do before we continue
our search for Federation Headquarters.
But you may have your five minutes.
Enjoy.